[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios, podcasts,
radio, news. How many Jackson Holes have
you actually been to now?
>> Uh, it's a little hard to say, but my
first one was 1997.
>> I've missed a few here and there as
breaking news has happened and I've had
to be somewhere else, but so somewhere
around 25 to 30.
>> So Joe, if we keep doing this for
another 40 years, we'll uh we'll notch
up as many Jackson holes as Mike has
been to. Maybe
>> not. But if he does it another 40 or so,
we can never catch up.
>> If Mike stops now and we keep doing it
until we're 80,
>> maybe we'll catch up.
>> I did a dead last.
>> I am both the most popular trader and
most successful trader at Citadel.
>> Feta's going viral.
>> Uh, barges.
>> This is an after school special except
>> I've decided I'm going to base my entire
personality going forward on campaigning
for a strategic pork reserve in the US.
>> Black gold.
>> These are the the important questions.
Is it robots taking over the world?
>> No, I think that like in a couple years
the AI will do a really good job of
making the OddLots podcast. One day that
person will have the mandate of heaven.
>> How do I get more popular and
successful?
>> We do have
>> the perfect guest.
>> Welcome to Lots More, where we catch up
with friends about what's going on right
now.
>> Because even when OddLots is over,
there's always lots more.
>> And we really do have the perfect guest.
We are of course talking to the one and
only Mike McKe of Bloomberg TV. A little
surprising speech today, huh?
>> Yeah, I was wrong. As were the majority
of analysts who thought that J. Paul
would want to leave his options open for
September because as we've been
repeating over and over again, there's
another jobs report, there's another CPI
report before the next meeting.
>> And so what happens if we see a
reversion to the mean? We had a weak
jobs report. What if the next one comes
in strong? Uh we had inflation
>> going through CPI at a low level. Does
that pick up a lot? In which case you
don't want to cut rates. So it was a bit
of a surprise that he said basically
opened the door to a rate cut because
now it's really hard to close that door.
Tracy, have you read Anna Wong's take
yet?
>> I have not. So, she has a new piece out
on the terminal which you you should
read, but she argues that's not so
dovish if you use the 2024 speech as the
benchmark, which is true for sure. That
was a more dovish speech. But what I
think the vibe is that maybe the three
of us have, it's certainly dovish in the
context of a lot of people suddenly
like, let's look at the inflation side
again.
>> Well, this is exactly it. So Mike, I
think you had the same experience as us,
which is a lot of the people from the
Fed that you've been talking to over the
past couple of days. They sounded more
hawkish than they did, you know, perhaps
like just three or four weeks ago.
>> Yeah. And I I have to think that or I
have to caution myself to look at this
as perhaps, as a statistician would say,
a selection error
>> because we happened to hit people who
were more hawkish. Obviously, the
chairman basically validated Chris
Waller's forecast that uh infl they've
decided that inflation is going to go
up, but it's going to go up slowly.
It'll take a while to get into the
economy and sector by sector, it'll be a
one-time price rise and not a continuing
price increase. Setting aside the actual
technical economic details of the speech
itself, were you surprised that there
wasn't something more, I don't know,
validary is the word, but you know, it's
his last speech as the chairman. It
comes at a time when we all were all
talking about the sort of threats to
Federal Reserve independence. Were you
surprised it was such a policy speech
and not any sort of nods to some of
these bigger things?
>> I was not surprised by that. Paul is
very self-fulfacing. He's not somebody
who likes to toot his own horn. And I we
kind of knew going in that he didn't
want to make a big deal of this being
his last Jackson Hole as chair.
>> The Fed independence thing was a bit of
a surprise because it has been such a a
big issue. But I think given the message
he wanted to send to the markets about
the policy going forward, plus he had
the whole section on the new framework
he had to discuss. Yeah. I think they
felt it was just going to be too long,
too much and that would come up in many
other uh fora to talk about.
>> It is funny, no one's talking about the
framework. The results of like five
years of work on the framework are
published today and they're just lost in
all
>> I have asked uh Fed officials about
this. I said, why do you do this?
Because they came up with this new
framework in 2020 that didn't work. And
a year into it, JP Pal said, "Well,
we've junk the framework because we've
got inflation." And so, if you're gonna
go to all this work to create a
framework and then as soon as the
economy turns, you junk it. Kind of
what's the point?
>> And their argument is that it gives them
sort of a reference point of how they
want to think about things. And today
really, they went back to 2012, which
was
>> we'll do whatever the economy needs when
it needs it. It's important to remember
it's interesting thinking about that
2020 framework because we are so the
existence of that framework is so 2010s
right it's so like thinking about well
the main problem of monetary policy is
long periods of undershoots
>> the zero bound
>> the zero bound constantly under 2% how
are we going to credibly get it above
and then five minutes later we have the
worst inflation yeah in 40 years that
was a real that framework from 2020 was
is an artifact of a time.
>> Yeah, absolutely. And the Fed's new
framework sort of takes into account the
fact that that could happen again
because they're not using shortfall
anymore in in employment. Uh but and
they're they've also dropped references
to the zero lower bound, but they
basically they're saying we admit that
we can't steer the economy in quite as
precise a way as we thought we could
because the underlying conditions that
we're working off of can change faster
than we anticipated. I will just note I
know that pal didn't speak about central
bank independence directly but there is
at least one paper being presented at
the conference that does deal with this
issue by Emmy Nakamura from Berkeley and
we have a really good episode coming up
with her. So there there is some
thematic discussion. It's just we're not
all hearing it because it's closed
doors. Although Mike, you get to go
inside the conference. I get to go
inside.
>> All right. So what's the vibe like in in
the room? Well, I hate to disappoint
everybody, but it's rather quite boring
unless unless you're an academic
economist because these papers are
written by academic economists and
they're designed to look at longer term
issues and try to put them into context
so that the central bankers can think
about them. Okay, here's a problem
that's come up. What's the research said
about it in the past? That sort of
thing. It's not a meeting where people
come in and go, "Okay, here's
unemployment and here's prices and what
do we do at the next meeting?" That that
doesn't get discussed at all. Even the
open market committee officials who are
here, they're not going to be really
talking about that because uh they talk
about that all the time. They're here to
fish and and hike and enjoy the scenery
along with these academic papers. So
inside it's an academic uh conference.
They present the papers. They have a
discussant who talks about the papers
and then people can ask questions. And
if you notice, you know, if you're
watching your Bloomberg terminal, it's
almost never a headline from inside
because nobody says anything that would
move markets or interest people really.
You know, other regional feds have their
conferences. So, you know, there's
there's a Boston Fed one in November.
There's an Atlanta Fed one. I think it's
somewhere in Florida at some point in
the year. The only thing that's really
special here is that, and Powell alluded
to it, it's Jackson Hole in August. and
anyone would be a fool to say no to
coming there and that's how they got
Vulkar to come because he liked fly
fishing like this in theory like they
could all show up at the other ones but
it's Jackson Hole in August going to say
and and and as you mentioned people are
here to fly fish I think that's actually
an important element even though it's
just a fun element which is that
>> it's late summer it's kind of like
halfway between vacation and work out
here for almost everyone another reason
that it has become important though is
starting with Ben Bernani during the
great financial crisis he came and the
chairman usually gave a speech to open
the conference on the conference topic
>> and it was like, okay, we're talking
about long-term labor issues. That's a
really good thing to talk about and
we're glad you're all here kind of
thing. Then he announced basically that
they were going to do QE for the first
time at this meeting. And then the next
year he also had announcement about uh
QEQT and what they were going to do. And
then all of a sudden the focus became
what's the chairman going to say?
Because
>> if there's rarely a Fed meeting in
August, just the way the calendar falls,
maybe at the very beginning, and then
there isn't one till September. So you
have this long month where there's no
reference point for the markets and that
this became the reference point. So
everybody pays attention to it and as
you know, it's a big buildup to it. Oh,
we've got Jackson Hole next week. What's
the chairman going to say? And so that's
really focused a lot of attention on it,
which then feeds on itself because it
becomes important. So people want to be
there because it is important.
>> This reminds me, there was an old study.
It was done a few years ago, so I would
love to see a new study, but it
basically looked at all the FOMC
statements and speeches over time. And
starting from 2009, they exploded in
both length and complexity. So I think
it used to be you could have like, you
know, a high school reading level and be
fine reading some of the FOMC
statements. They were very short, like
400 words. and then they became like
2,000 words and you needed a college
degree at a minimum to fully understand
them. Talk to us about just like the
format of the speech cuz this is
something else that people like to do is
dissect like the number of words and
things like that. And it is true this is
a longer speech this year versus the
relatively short speech from last year
where Pal very definitively opened the
door to a cut.
>> Yeah. Uh well I think that what made
this speech long was talking about the
framework. It's as we said maybe
somewhat irrelevant but he had to go
through it. They'd been doing this
exercise and it was anticipated he would
announce it here. So basically he went
through it. We've now done the exercise
and now we've explained it to you and so
you'll understand going forward if we
refer to this. So that made it longer.
The part that uh was really kind of to
the point was the stuff about the
economy. He outlined what they were
thinking about uh the labor market and
what they were thinking about inflation
and then how those two knit together. If
this had been an ordinary speech without
the framework, it wouldn't have been as
long. Maybe it would have come across as
even more punchy because it was just on
that subject. you you were talking about
the Fed's statements getting very long
uh in the post great financial crisis
years and the Fed realized that at one
point and so about two or three years
ago they've cut them back significantly.
We used to have very long statements
where they tried to explain every little
thing and people found that too much. So
now they're just kind of saying here's
we got one paragraph on where the
economy is and a paragraph that says
here's what we're doing about it.
>> You know another nice thing about
Jackson Hole in late August is you don't
just get you don't just lure the Fed
share there. you lure central bankers
all around the world. But I feel like in
this moment the the Fed itself, the Fed
is always first among equals. Most
people would agree with that, but the
Fed because of all the dramas like this
black hole sucking up all the energy.
It's your perception, you know, we saw
the walk where Powell was with Lagarde
and Bailey and Ua is your perception
that all the developed market central
banks are roughly wrestling with still
the same things because there's just
been there's been this global factor of
the inflation and so forth. Are they all
sort of basically feeling the same
stresses?
>> They are. We're still living in a
post-pandemic world. So data are
somewhat difficult to read and you see
the ups and downs of the economies that
you may or may not be able to track. But
the biggest thing at the moment is that
they're all wrestling with Trump fiscal
policy. But the fiscal policy has
different impacts on different
countries. For the United States, it's
inflationary. For many of the countries
out there, it's deflationary because
their currency is going down. The dollar
is getting stronger. And so they have
different problems they have to deal
with. They all have a problem with the
consequences of the Trump policy, but
the consequences are different for each
one.
>> Well, you were talking about this on TV
earlier because when it comes to
tariffs, there is still a huge debate
over how inflationary they might
actually be because in traditional
economics, you would view them as a tax
which tends to destroy demand and can
lead to deflation. On the other hand, we
have seen producer prices start to pick
up. What have you learned about just how
policymakers are actually viewing the
impact of tariffs at this conference?
>> Well, there has been division. We have
the Chris Waller version who went to the
textbook and said tariffs are a one-time
increase in the price level and then
since he first said that in July, what
we've seen is the president delaying
these tariffs. So, they come on one by
one and that drags the process out. Now,
what the chairman seemed to decide was
that it's still going to be a one-time
increase sector by sector. So, it might
drag out, but it's not going to be an
ongoing process of each sector seeing
prices rise. So, the impacts they they
have a hard time judging because it's
not like you pass uh Smoot Holly and on
a certain day it takes effect and you
see the immediate price impact and then
you can measure what's happening and
what's it's going to do. Here they have
to take into account each sector,
whether the the exporter absorbs any of
it, whether the importer absorbs any of
it, what companies do in terms of
pricing. Do they take some out of their
margins because they don't want to lose
market share or do they just pass it
along to people? These are all complex
questions and and as one of the Fed
economist said to me, each one affects
another.
>> So because so much of this stuff is
intermediate goods that are used to
price something else. So it gets very
complicated. So, it is hard for them to
know exactly how this is going to play
out.
>> Tracy, I have a take.
>> Oh. Oh, do you? What a surprise. All
right, go ahead. I was thinking about
this when we were on air is maybe the
answer is that tariffs are a one-off
>> in terms of the inflationary impulse but
that the underlying political impulse to
impose tariffs this desire for everyone
to have all their stuff and protect
their home uh countries industries and
so forth is going to be this new
permanent feature that is not a one-off.
>> Would that feature be inflationary?
>> And if that is sustained then maybe it
is.
>> Yeah. I mean there is an irony here
which is uh the Trump administration has
long criticized paperwork and government
bureaucracy and things like that and I
cannot even imagine how much time
companies are spending trying to figure
out tariffs right now and doing customs
documentation and stuff like that.
>> Okay, Mike, next year we're going to
have a new Fed chair, new vibes at
Jackson Hole potentially. Who are you
watching out for
>> right now? I'm still watching out for
the original Trump list, the Kevin's
Hasset and Worsh and for Chris Waller.
You could argue that the speech today
improved Waller's chances if if you were
looking at it from a Las Vegas point of
view in terms of odds because he was
right,
>> right? Sort of.
>> At least at least the Fed is saying he
was right. But this is Donald Trump. So,
we have no idea. I think most of the
people who've been sort of added on in
the talking about stage in terms of the
list are more red herrings. Some of them
are obviously not going to be the chair,
but what he's been able to do is get
more people on TV
getting interviewed about, are you going
to be the chair? And they're all saying,
well, we need to cut rates. You're not
on the list if you're not going to cut
rates. So, are they really serious
candidates? And Scott Besson says,
"Okay, I got 11 people I'm going to
bring in." The president keeps saying,
"I got three people I'm going to choose
from." So, I think you go back to the
original list. He's comfortable with
those people. They all look like they
could be fed chairs and we know the the
impression that the person makes is
important. So they're they're the most
likely ones to choose from. I'm not
saying he couldn't surprise. He
surprises in almost everything he does.
>> Have you interacted with Waller before?
I've never met him. So
>> Oh, I know Chris quite well. The one
thing about Chris is we've we've
extrapolated the Lisa Cook thing to if
the president got four people on the
board, then they can fire all the bank
presidents, etc., etc., and he'd have
all this control. I don't think Waller
would go along with that. He's in favor
of lower interest rates. Uh he has his
own ideas about the economy, but he's a
very smart economist and uh and you
could defend what he says even if you
don't necessarily agree with it. But
he's an institutionalist. He's somebody
who follows what the Fed has done in the
past. And I don't think he would give in
to the president's desire to do
something that would hurt the Fed, hurt
its credibility, hurt its ability to do
its job.
>> Tracy, it's 2025. I think David Zervos
looks like a Fed chair.
>> Okay, I'm going to go fly fishing. I'm
going to do what I'm supposed to do at
Jackson Hole and go fish.
>> Let's go.
>> Lots more is produced by Carmen
Rodriguez and Dashel Bennett with help
from Moses Andom and Kale Brooks. Our
sound engineer is Blake Maples. Sage
Bowman is the head of Bloomberg
podcasts.
>> Please rate, review, and subscribe to
OddLots and lots more on your favorite
podcast platforms.
>> And remember that Bloomberg subscribers
can listen to all of our podcasts adree
by connecting through Apple Podcasts.
Thanks for listening.